docs/developer-setup.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 6
---

import Link from '../src/components/link/Link';

# Developer Setup

This page explains the steps necessary to be setup on the developer machines to start development of xpanse.

## Prerequisite tools

- Java 21 - OpenJDK or Eclipse Adoptium
- GIT client
- Maven for Java applications
- Docker
- Docker compose
- NodeJS for UI module
- NPM for UI module.

## Setup xpanse Project

The main xpanse project can be built and executed locally using the detailed documentation available in <Link url={'./runtime'} name={'runtime'}/> page.

## Dependent Components

For regular development activities, xpanse needs some predefined applications from it's stack based on the use case.
But for most cases, the dependencies are kept as minimal as possible.

| Component      | Mandatory | Default                             |
| -------------- | --------- | ----------------------------------- |
| Database       | No        | H2 Database                         |
| terraform-boot | No        | terraform-local                     |
| tofu-maker     | No        | opentofu-local                      |
| policy-man     | No        | Necessary only for testing policies |
| zitadel        | No        | We can also use 'noauth' mode       |
| UI             | No        | We can test APIs directly           |
| Redis Cache    | No        | Caffeine Cache                      |

To set up the above-mentioned components, we can either use a master docker-compose configuration
which will start all components with default configuration.

Or we can also make start individual components based on the use case.

### Master Docker Compose

By executing the below commands, we can start all components in one click.

```shell
# Download docker compose configuration file.
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-relops/refs/heads/main/local/docker-compose.yml

# Run the database and application containers.
docker compose up --d
```

:::tip disable containers if necessary
If you feel that any of the containers in the docker compose file isn't necessary for your use case,
you can simply comment them out.
:::

### Individual Component Configuration

### Database

By default, the development environment uses h2 database.
Other than this, xpanse supports MySql as well at the moment.

If you wish to test with MySql, the MySql container can be started using the below command.

```shell
docker run --name mysql-db -p 3306:3306 -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=xpanse -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=xpanse -e MYSQL_DATABASE=xpanse -e MYSQL_USER=xpanse -d mysql:latest
```

Then you also need to pass one additional environment variable to xpanse application and then start it..

```shell
SPRING_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD=xpanse
```

### Deployer Tools Installation

Depending on the type of deployers you intend to use,
the below steps can be used to install necessary deployers for local development.

:::info Deployer Development
These steps are necessary for development activities in the main xpanse application as well as
deployer applications such as `terraform-boot` and `tofu-maker`.
:::

#### Auto Installation

During the deployment job, the deployer automatically downloads the necessary deployer binaries.
If you have an active and stable connection, then there is nothing for be done in this case.

#### Using Docker Images

If you wish to use remote deployers such as 'terraform-boot' or 'tofu-maker',
then you can simply pull the latest docker containers and configure the xpanse runtime to use it.

In this case, the images already contains the default supported Terraform and OpenTofu versions respectively and
additionally can install new versions on demand.

```shell
docker run -p 9090:9090 -d --name terraform-boot ghcr.io/eclipse-xpanse/terraform-boot:latest
docker run -p 9092:9092 -d --name tofu-maker ghcr.io/eclipse-xpanse/tofu-maker:latest
```

#### Manual Installation

If you wish you manually install the deployers for whatever reason, then the below steps are necessary.

:::important Necessary for local or remote deployment
This method is necessary for local and remote deployment if the auto installation isn't possible.
:::

##### Terraform CLI Installation

Terraform CLI can be installed using the steps from
the <Link name={'official guide'} url={'https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install'}/>.

##### OpenTofu CLI Installation

Terraform CLI can be installed using the steps from
the <Link name={'official guide'} url={`https://opentofu.org/docs/intro/install/`} />.

### Auth Layer Installation

#### No Auth Mode

If feature under development doesn't need any authentication or authorization features,
then it can be turned off completely by simply activating the `noauth` spring profile.

#### OAuth Mode

This is the default mode and by default we use Zitadel as the identity provider.
We build a fully configured development Zitadel application and DB images which contains
all necessary configuration as well as test users.

Run the below command to start the OAuth stack.

```shell
# Download the docker compose configuration.
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-iam/refs/heads/main/zitadel/local/run/docker-compose.yml

# Run the database and application containers.
docker compose up --d
```

:::important Admin User
Also, in case you wish to connect and check and change the configuration of the Zitadel instance,
the admin user can be used

URL - http://localhost:8088

username - zitadel-admin@zitadel.localhost

password - Zitadel@123

:::

The necessary end users with multiple combinations of roles and metadata can be found <Link url={'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-iam/refs/heads/main/zitadel/terraform/environments/local.tfvars'} name='here'/>
. Here, we must use the provided **email address** as the username for OAuth application.

:::tip client configuration
The `zitadel-local` spring profile already contains the configuration details necessary to connect to this local
Zitadel instance. The developer has no other extra task to be done.
:::

More information about Zitadel can be found <Link url={'https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-iam/blob/main/zitadel/README.md'} name='here' />.

### policy-man

policy-man is a Golang based application.

#### Manual start

We will need Golang SDK to be installed and the steps mentioned <Link url={'https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/policy-man/blob/main/README.md#how-to-use'} name='here' />
can be used to start the application.

#### Docker Image

Easiest way to simply start the `policy-man` application using the released docker images.

```shell
docker run -p 8090:8090 -d --name policy-man ghcr.io/eclipse-xpanse/policy-man:latest --host=0.0.0.0
```

:::info No changes necessary on xpanse
Irrespective of the above methods used to start policy-man,
no changes are necessary on the xpanse side.
Default configuration already points to correct local instances of the application.
:::

### UI Module

UI module requires node and NPM binaries installed on the developer machine.

#### Auth modes

Depending on the necessity, the UI can be started <Link url={'https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-ui/blob/main/package.json#L28'} name={'with'} /> or <Link url={'https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-ui/blob/main/package.json#L24'} name={'without'} /> auth mode.

```shell
# Start with noauth mode
npm run start

# start with auth mode
npm run start-with-zitadel-local
```

More documentation on UI can be found <Link url={'./ui'} name={'here'} />.

Commit message:

fix dev doc for using local mysql database

docs/developer-setup.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 6
---

import Link from '../src/components/link/Link';

# Developer Setup

This page explains the steps necessary to be setup on the developer machines to start development of xpanse.

## Prerequisite tools

- Java 21 - OpenJDK or Eclipse Adoptium
- GIT client
- Maven for Java applications
- Docker
- Docker compose
- NodeJS for UI module
- NPM for UI module.
- Go SDK

## Setup xpanse Project

The main xpanse project can be built and executed locally using the detailed documentation available in <Link url={'./runtime'} name={'runtime'}/> page.

## Dependent Components

For regular development activities, xpanse needs some predefined applications from it's stack based on the use case.
But for most cases, the dependencies are kept as minimal as possible.

| Component      | Mandatory | Default                             |
| -------------- | --------- | ----------------------------------- |
| Database       | No        | H2 Database                         |
| terraform-boot | No        | terraform-local                     |
| tofu-maker     | No        | opentofu-local                      |
| policy-man     | No        | Necessary only for testing policies |
| zitadel        | No        | We can also use 'noauth' mode       |
| UI             | No        | We can test APIs directly           |
| Redis Cache    | No        | Caffeine Cache                      |

To set up the above-mentioned components, we can either use a master docker-compose configuration
which will start all components with default configuration.

Or we can also make start individual components based on the use case.

### Master Docker Compose

By executing the below commands, we can start all components in one click.

```shell
# Download docker compose configuration file.
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-relops/refs/heads/main/local/docker-compose.yml

# Run the database and application containers.
docker compose up --d
```

:::tip disable containers if necessary
If you feel that any of the containers in the docker compose file isn't necessary for your use case,
you can simply comment them out.
:::

### Individual Component Configuration

### Database

By default, the development environment uses h2 database.
Other than this, xpanse supports MySql as well at the moment.

If you wish to test with MySql, the MySql container can be started using the below command.

```shell
docker run --name mysql-db -p 3306:3306 -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=xpanse -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=xpanse -e MYSQL_DATABASE=xpanse -e MYSQL_USER=xpanse -d mysql:latest
```

Then use the Spring Boot `mysql` and also to pass one additional environment variable to xpanse application as below.

```shell
SPRING_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD=xpanse
```

### Deployer Tools Installation

Depending on the type of deployers you intend to use,
the below steps can be used to install necessary deployers for local development.

:::info Deployer Development
These steps are necessary for development activities in the main xpanse application as well as
deployer applications such as `terraform-boot` and `tofu-maker`.
:::

#### Auto Installation

During the deployment job, the deployer automatically downloads the necessary deployer binaries.
If you have an active and stable connection, then there is nothing for be done in this case.

#### Using Docker Images

If you wish to use remote deployers such as 'terraform-boot' or 'tofu-maker',
then you can simply pull the latest docker containers and configure the xpanse runtime to use it.

In this case, the images already contains the default supported Terraform and OpenTofu versions respectively and
additionally can install new versions on demand.

```shell
docker run -p 9090:9090 -d --name terraform-boot ghcr.io/eclipse-xpanse/terraform-boot:latest
docker run -p 9092:9092 -d --name tofu-maker ghcr.io/eclipse-xpanse/tofu-maker:latest
```

#### Manual Installation

If you wish you manually install the deployers for whatever reason, then the below steps are necessary.

:::important Necessary for local or remote deployment
This method is necessary for local and remote deployment if the auto installation isn't possible.
:::

##### Terraform CLI Installation

Terraform CLI can be installed using the steps from
the <Link name={'official guide'} url={'https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install'}/>.

##### OpenTofu CLI Installation

Terraform CLI can be installed using the steps from
the <Link name={'official guide'} url={`https://opentofu.org/docs/intro/install/`} />.

### Auth Layer Installation

#### No Auth Mode

If feature under development doesn't need any authentication or authorization features,
then it can be turned off completely by simply activating the `noauth` spring profile.

#### OAuth Mode

This is the default mode and by default we use Zitadel as the identity provider.
We build a fully configured development Zitadel application and DB images which contains
all necessary configuration as well as test users.

Run the below command to start the OAuth stack.

```shell
# Download the docker compose configuration.
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-iam/refs/heads/main/zitadel/local/run/docker-compose.yml

# Run the database and application containers.
docker compose up --d
```

:::important Admin User
Also, in case you wish to connect and check and change the configuration of the Zitadel instance,
the admin user can be used

URL - http://localhost:8088

username - zitadel-admin@zitadel.localhost

password - Zitadel@123

:::

The necessary end users with multiple combinations of roles and metadata can be found <Link url={'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-iam/refs/heads/main/zitadel/terraform/environments/local.tfvars'} name='here'/>
. Here, we must use the provided **email address** as the username for OAuth application.

:::tip client configuration
The `zitadel-local` spring profile already contains the configuration details necessary to connect to this local
Zitadel instance. The developer has no other extra task to be done.
:::

More information about Zitadel can be found <Link url={'https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-iam/blob/main/zitadel/README.md'} name='here' />.

### policy-man

policy-man is a Golang based application.

#### Manual start

We will need Golang SDK to be installed and the steps mentioned <Link url={'https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/policy-man/blob/main/README.md#how-to-use'} name='here' />
can be used to start the application.

#### Docker Image

Easiest way to simply start the `policy-man` application using the released docker images.

```shell
docker run -p 8090:8090 -d --name policy-man ghcr.io/eclipse-xpanse/policy-man:latest --host=0.0.0.0
```

:::info No changes necessary on xpanse
Irrespective of the above methods used to start policy-man,
no changes are necessary on the xpanse side.
Default configuration already points to correct local instances of the application.
:::

### UI Module

UI module requires node and NPM binaries installed on the developer machine.

#### Auth modes

Depending on the necessity, the UI can be started <Link url={'https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-ui/blob/main/package.json#L28'} name={'with'} /> or <Link url={'https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse-ui/blob/main/package.json#L24'} name={'without'} /> auth mode.

```shell
# Start with noauth mode
npm run start

# start with auth mode
npm run start-with-zitadel-local
```

More documentation on UI can be found <Link url={'./ui'} name={'here'} />.
