docs/spring-profiles.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 8
---

import Link from '../src/components/link/Link';

# Spring Profiles

To provide better flexibility and modularity, xpanse extensively uses spring profiles for different parts of the application.
Each profile either enables a certain functionality or provides some default configuration.

<!-- vale off -->

| profile name         | forbidden for prod | Description                                                                                                                               |
| -------------------- | ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| nouth                | Yes                | to disable any auth for APIs.                                                                                                             |
| oauth                | No                 | to enable oauth based auth for APIs.                                                                                                      |
| zitadel              | No                 | to use Zitadel as oauth provider.                                                                                                         |
| zitadel-testbed      | Yes                | to use test instance of Zitadel.                                                                                                          |
| zitadel-local        | Yes                | to use local instance of Zitadel.                                                                                                         |
| tofu-maker           | No                 | to use remote instance of OpenTofu for deployment.                                                                                        |
| terra-boot           | No                 | to use remote instance of Terraform for deployment.                                                                                       |
| local-docker-stack   | Yes                | to be used when local docker containers of all xpanse components.                                                                         |
| dev                  | Yes                | to be used in all local development environments.                                                                                         |
| opentelemetry        | No                 | to enable OTEL instrumentation and forwarding.                                                                                            |
| mysql                | No                 | to enable MySQL database as persistence layer.                                                                                            |
| test                 | Yes                | Used in tests for having dummy configuration values.                                                                                      |
| agent-api            | No                 | Used when we want to deploy only the agent APIs. This is used for generating agent API schema and also to scale agent APIs independently. |
| generate-openapi-doc | Yes                | Used only to generate API documentation for swagger-hub.                                                                                  |

<!-- vale on -->

## Configuration Properties

All profiles and the configuration properties that are part of it can be found at <Link name='this place' url='https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse/tree/main/runtime/src/main/resources'/>.
Configuration values can be overridden with methods supported by Spring framework as described <Link name='here' url='https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/reference/features/external-config.html'/>.

## Activating Profiles

Spring provides multiple ways to activate profiles.
The list of profile names which we intend to activate can be passed as

1. VM argument.
2. Program argument.
3. Environment variable.

```shell
# VM argument
java -Dspring.profiles.active=profile1,profile2 -jar xpanse-runtime-*-SNAPSHOT.jar
# Program argument
java -jar xpanse-runtime-*-SNAPSHOT.jar --spring.profiles.active=profile1,profile2
# Environment variable
export SPRING_PROFILE_ACTIVE=profile1,profile2
```

Commit message:

add cache docs for xpanse

docs/spring-profiles.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 8
---

import Link from '../src/components/link/Link';

# Spring Profiles

To provide better flexibility and modularity, xpanse extensively uses spring profiles for different parts of the application.
Each profile either enables a certain functionality or provides some default configuration.

<!-- vale off -->

| profile name         | forbidden for prod | Description                                                                                                                               |
| -------------------- | ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| nouth                | Yes                | to disable any auth for APIs.                                                                                                             |
| oauth                | No                 | to enable oauth based auth for APIs.                                                                                                      |
| zitadel              | No                 | to use Zitadel as oauth provider.                                                                                                         |
| zitadel-testbed      | Yes                | to use test instance of Zitadel.                                                                                                          |
| zitadel-local        | Yes                | to use local instance of Zitadel.                                                                                                         |
| tofu-maker           | No                 | to use remote instance of OpenTofu for deployment.                                                                                        |
| terra-boot           | No                 | to use remote instance of Terraform for deployment.                                                                                       |
| local-docker-stack   | Yes                | to be used when local docker containers of all xpanse components.                                                                         |
| dev                  | Yes                | to be used in all local development environments.                                                                                         |
| opentelemetry        | No                 | to enable OTEL instrumentation and forwarding.                                                                                            |
| mysql                | No                 | to enable MySQL database as persistence layer.                                                                                            |
| redis                | No                 | to enable Redis as distributed cache.                                                                                                     |
| test                 | Yes                | Used in tests for having dummy configuration values.                                                                                      |
| agent-api            | No                 | Used when we want to deploy only the agent APIs. This is used for generating agent API schema and also to scale agent APIs independently. |
| generate-openapi-doc | Yes                | Used only to generate API documentation for swagger-hub.                                                                                  |

<!-- vale on -->

## Configuration Properties

All profiles and the configuration properties that are part of it can be found at <Link name='this place' url='https://github.com/eclipse-xpanse/xpanse/tree/main/runtime/src/main/resources'/>.
Configuration values can be overridden with methods supported by Spring framework as described <Link name='here' url='https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/reference/features/external-config.html'/>.

## Activating Profiles

Spring provides multiple ways to activate profiles.
The list of profile names which we intend to activate can be passed as

1. VM argument.
2. Program argument.
3. Environment variable.

```shell
# VM argument
java -Dspring.profiles.active=profile1,profile2 -jar xpanse-runtime-*-SNAPSHOT.jar
# Program argument
java -jar xpanse-runtime-*-SNAPSHOT.jar --spring.profiles.active=profile1,profile2
# Environment variable
export SPRING_PROFILE_ACTIVE=profile1,profile2
```
